# CLI Configuration

```{warning}
This project is still evolving, so these docs may be incomplete or out-of-date.
```

Jumpstarter can be configured as either a client, an exporter, or both depending
on your use case and deployment strategy.

By default, a local client and exporter session are automatically initialized when
running test scripts through `jmp exporter shell` command.
This allows for easy testing of new drivers, client libraries, or verifying that tests work
on your local bench.

When interacting with remote exporters in a CLI or CI environment, multiple clients
can be configured on the same system and used to interact with different devices
and different exporter instances.

Similarly, multiple exporters can be configured on a single host system to interact
with many different devices. However, each exporter instance is independent, making
it possible to stop, restart, and add new exporters while others are executing tests.

## User Configuration

Jumpstarter stores user-specific configs in the `~/.config/jumpstarter` directory
within the user's home folder.

The user config file defines the current client config and any user-specific
configurations for `jmp` CLI tool.

```yaml
# ~/.config/jumpstarter/config.yaml

apiVersion: jumpstarter.dev/v1alpha1
kind: UserConfig
config:
  current-client: default
```

## Clients

Client configurations are stored in the Jumpstarter user configuration directory
`~/.config/jumpstarter/clients`. Each client config is a YAML file that contains
the client name, access token, and any configuration parameters.

### Client Config

```yaml
# ~/.config/jumpstarter/clients/myclient.yaml

apiVersion: jumpstarter.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Client
metadata:
  name: myclient
  namespace: jumpstarter-lab
tls:
  insecure: false
  ca: ""
endpoint: "jumpstarter.my-lab.com:1443"
token: "dGhpc2lzYXRva2VuLTEyMzQxMjM0MTIzNEyMzQtc2Rxd3Jxd2VycXdlcnF3ZXJxd2VyLTEyMzQxMjM0MTIz"
drivers:
  # Wildcards are supported
  allow: ["jumpstarter_drivers_*", "vendorpackage.*"]
```

- `endpoint` - The gRPC endpoint of the Jumpstarter controller server.
- `token` - A client auth token generated by the controller.
- `drivers` - Driver client library configuration.
  - `allow` - A list of allowed driver namespaces to automatically load.
  - `unsafe: true` - Should all drivers be allowed to load?
- `tls`
  - `insecure` - Set to `true` to disable TLS verification of the gRPC endpoint.
  - `ca` - Path to a custom CA certificate file to use for TLS verification.

## Multiple Clients

Multiple client configs can be added to the `~/.config/jumpstarter/clients` directory
manually or by using the Jumpstarter CLI.

Similar to kubectl, Jumpstarter allows you to switch between different client
configurations using the CLI tool. A `default` client is automatically configured
when installing the Jumpstarter Helm chart with `jmp install`.

## Creating a client in the distributed service

To create a new client in the distributed service you must use the `jmp admin create` subcommand,
please follow the instructions in the [Jumpstarter service CLI](../cli/clients.md).

## Importing a client created by the administrator

Importing a new client is as simple as copying the administrator provided yaml
file to `~/.config/jumpstarter/clients/`, alternatively if we have the token
and endpoint the `jmp client create <name>` command can be used to create
the config file.

To switch between different client configs, use the `jmp client use-config <name>` command:

```bash
$ jmp client use-config another
Using client config '/home/jdoe/.config/jumpstarter/clients/another.yaml'
```

All client configurations can be listed with `jmp client list-configs`:

```bash
$ jmp client list-configs
CURRENT   NAME       ENDPOINT                       PATH
*         default    jumpstarter1.my-lab.com:1443   /home/jdoe/.config/jumpstarter/clients/default.yaml
          myclient   jumpstarter2.my-lab.com:1443   /home/jdoe/.config/jumpstarter/clients/myclient.yaml
          another    jumpstarter3.my-lab.com:1443   /home/jdoe/.config/jumpstarter/clients/another.yaml
```

Clients can also be removed using `jmp client delete-config <name>`:

```bash
$ jmp client delete-config myclient
Deleted client config '/home/jdoe/.config/jumpstarter/clients/myclient.yaml'
```


## Client Environment Variables

The client configuration may also be provided by environment variables which may
be useful in CI or when writing a script that uses Jumpstarter.

- `JUMPSTARTER_GRPC_INSECURE` - Set to `1` to disable TLS verification.
- `JMP_CLIENT_CONFIG` - A path to a client configuration YAML file to use.
- `JMP_CLIENT` - The name of a registered client config to use.
- `JMP_NAMESPACE` - The namespace in the jumpstarter-controller to use, like `metadata.namespace`.
- `JMP_NAME` - The client/exporter name in the jumpstarter-controller to use, like `metadata.name`.
- `JMP_ENDPOINT` - The gRPC endpoint of the Jumpstarter controller server
(overrides the config value).
- `JMP_TOKEN` - A client auth token generated by the controller
(overrides the config value).
- `JMP_DRIVERS_ALLOW` - A comma-separated list of allowed driver namespaces
to automatically load. Can be set to `UNSAFE` to allow unsafe loading of drivers.

## System Configuration

Jumpstarter stores system configs in the `/etc/jumpstarter` directory.
This configuration directory is primarily used by the exporters
`/etc/jumpstarter/exporters` as they often run as daemon services on the host system.

## Exporters

Exporter configurations are by default stored globally in the Jumpstarter config
directory `/etc/jumpstarter/exporters`. Each exporter config is a YAML file that
provides connection details and a list of exporter drivers.

### Exporter Config

Exporters can be configured using a pure-YAML format, which allows for the configuration
of built-in drivers and any additional driver packages registered by the user.

```yaml
# /etc/jumpstarter/exporters/myexporter.yaml

apiVersion: jumpstarter.dev/v1alpha1
kind: Exporter
metadata:
  name: myexporter
  namespace: jumpstarter-lab
tls:
  insecure: false
  ca: ""
endpoint: "jumpstarter.my-lab.com:1443"
token: "dGhpc2lzYXRva2VuLTEyMzQxMjM0MTIzNEyMzQtc2Rxd3Jxd2VycXdlcnF3ZXJxd2VyLTEyMzQxMjM0MTIz"
export:
  power:
    type: "jumpstarter_driver_power.driver.PduPower"
    config:
      host: "192.168.1.111"
      port: 1234
      username: "admin"
      password: "secret"
  serial:
    type: "jumpstarter_driver_pyserial.driver.PySerial"
    config:
      url: "/dev/ttyUSB0"
      baudrate: 115200
  custom:
    type: "vendorpackage.CustomDriver"
    config:
      hello: "world"
```

- `metadata` - Name/namespace information for the jumsptarter controller to identify the exporter along the token.
- `endpoint` - The gRPC endpoint of the Jumpstarter controller server.
- `token` - An exporter auth token generated by the controller.
- `export` - Exporter driver configuration.
- `tls`
  - `insecure` - Set to `true` to disable TLS verification of the gRPC endpoint.
  - `ca` - Path to a custom CA certificate file to use for TLS verification.

### Exporter CLI Commands

### Creating a exporter in the distributed service

To create a new exporter in the distributed service you must use the `jmp admin create` command,
please follow the instructions in the [Jumpstarter service CLI](../cli/exporters.md).

### Creating a exporter configuration file
To create a new exporter configuration file from a know endpoint and
token the `jmp exporter create <name>` command can be used.

```bash
$ jmp exporter create myexporter
Endpoint: grpc.jumpstarter.my.domain.com
Token: <<token>>
```

To use a specific config when starting the exporter:

```bash
$ jmp exporter run my-exporter
Using exporter config '/etc/jumpstarter/exporters/another/exporter.yaml'
```

The path to a config can also be provided:

```bash
jmp exporter run -c /etc/jumpstarter/exporters/another/exporter.yaml
```

All exporter configurations can be listed with `jmp exporter list`:

```bash
$ jmp exporter list
ALIAS             PATH
test-exporter-2   /etc/jumpstarter/exporters/test-exporter-2.yaml
my-exporter       /etc/jumpstarter/exporters/my-exporter.yaml
```

Exporers can also be removed using `jmp exporter delete <name>`:

```bash
$ jmp exporter delete myexporter
Deleted exporter config '/etc/jumpstarter/exporters/myexporter.yaml'
```

### Exporter Environment Variables

The exporter configuration may also be provided by environment variables which
may be useful in CI or when writing a script that uses Jumpstarter.

- `JUMPSTARTER_GRPC_INSECURE` - Set to `1` to disable TLS verification.
to use.
- `JMP_ENDPOINT` - The gRPC endpoint of the Jumpstarter controller server
(overrides the config value).
- `JMP_TOKEN` - An exporter auth token generated by the controller
(overrides the config value).
- `JMP_NAMESPACE` - The namespace in the jumpstarter-controller to use, like `metadata.namespace`.
- `JMP_NAME` - The client/exporter name in the jumpstarter-controller to use, like `metadata.name`.


## Running an Exporter

The exporter service can be run as a container either within the same cluster
(using node affinity) or on a remote machine that has access to the cluster over
the network.

### Running using Podman

To run the exporter container on a test runner using Podman:

```{code-block} bash
:substitutions:
$ sudo podman run --rm -ti --name my-exporter --net=host --privileged \
                -v /run/udev:/run/udev -v /dev:/dev -v /etc/jumpstarter:/etc/jumpstarter \
                quay.io/jumpstarter-dev/jumpstarter:{{version}} \
                jmp-exporter run my-exporter

INFO:jumpstarter.exporter.exporter:Registering exporter with controller
INFO:jumpstarter.exporter.exporter:Currently not leased
```


This will run the exporter in the foreground and allow you to observe the behavior.
Please note that we are running the exporter as root, with access to all devices and network
interfaces, this is most likely necessary for the exporter to access the interface
devices that will allow it to control the target DUT(s).

Once we are satisfied with the behavior we can install the exporter as a systemd service:

#### Running as a Service

To run the exporter as a service podman-systemd is recommended, by using podman-systemd
you can simply create a systemd service file at `/etc/containers/systemd/my-exporter.container` with
the following content:

```{code-block} ini
:substitutions:
[Unit]
Description=My exporter

[Container]
ContainerName=my-exporter
Exec=/jumpstarter/bin/jmp exporter run my-exporter
Image=quay.io/jumpstarter-dev/jumpstarter:{{version}}
Network=host
PodmanArgs=--privileged
Volume=/run/udev:/run/udev
Volume=/dev:/dev
Volume=/etc/jumpstarter:/etc/jumpstarter

[Service]
Restart=always
StartLimitBurst=0

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target default.target
```

Then enable and start the service:

```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable --now my-exporter
```
