# Clients

To interact with your target device from a development machine or through a
CI/CD pipeline, you must use a Jumpstarter client.

The Python client can be used either as a library through a testing tool such as
[pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) or as a [CLI tool](../cli/index.md).

## Types of Clients

Jumpstarter supports two types of client configurations: local and remote.

### Local

When using Jumpstarter in *local-only* mode, you can use the local
client functionality to directly access your hardware. The local client will
automatically use any drivers that are registered without the need for an
exporter instance running in the background.

You can get started with a local client by following the
[Setup a Local Client](../getting-started/setup-local-client.md) guide.

### Remote

When using Jumpstarter in *distributed* mode, the client must be configured to
connect to an instance of the Jumpstarter Service that can authenticate clients
and tunnel requests to the appropriate exporter instance.

The following parameters are required to setup a remote client:
- The URL of a Jumpstarter Service endpoint to connect to.
- An authentication token generated by the Jumpstarter.

```{note}
The endpoint must be accessible from your client machine to communicate
with the Jumpstarter Service.
```

You can get started with a remove client by following the
[Setup a Remove Client](../getting-started/setup-local-client.md) guide.

We will discuss how remote clients connect to exporters in the next section
on the [Jumpstarter Service](./service.md).
